=head1 NAME

portscout - A tool to scan for new versions of FreeBSD ports.


=head1 SYNOPSIS

    portscout build

    while (lazy) {
        portscout rebuild
        portscout check
        portscout showupdates
    }


=head1 DESCRIPTION

Portscout is an automated system designed to search for new versions of
software available in the FreeBSD ports tree. It is primarily designed for use
by FreeBSD port maintainers, who can avoid trailing around dozens of websites
looking for updates. However, I hope that others might find it useful too.

The current version of Portscout is also capable of checking OpenBSD's ports,
NetBSD's pkgsrc, and also a generic list of software from an XML file.


=head1 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

The following software is required to run Portscout:

    - PostgreSQL or SQLite
    - POSIX-compatible system
    - The FreeBSD ports tree
    - Berkeley make
    - Perl 5.6+

Plus we need a few Perl modules:

    - URI
    - DBD::Pg or DBD::SQLite
    - Net::FTP
    - Proc::Queue
    - LWP::UserAgent
    - MIME::Lite
    - XML::XPath
    - XML::XPath::XMLParser

SQLite support is currently limited to non-forking mode only. That is, if you
decide to use SQLite, Portscout will only check one port at a time; this will
severely limit Portscout's speed/efficiency. It is therefore suggested that
SQLite only be used for relatively light workloads.


=head1 INITIAL SET-UP

=head2 Initialise Database

The recommended database backend is PostgreSQL.

=head3 Option One: PostgreSQL

Create database:

    # createuser -U pgsql -P portscout
    # createdb -U pgsql portscout

Execute the included F<pgsql_init.sql> script via C<psql>:

    # psql portscout portscout < sql/pgsql_init.sql

This will create the database tables for you.

=head3 Option Two: SQLite

Create a database file with the included script:

    # sqlite3 /var/db/portscout.db < sql/sqlite_init.sql

=head2 Configure Portscout

Review F<portscout.conf>, and check it suits your needs. The defaults should be
reasonable for most people. You can reduce C<num_children> and C<workqueue_size>
if you don't want Portscout sucking up all your resources.

Please note that Portscout's internal defaults differ from the defaults in
F<portscout.conf> - this is because without a config file, Portscout tries to be
"portable" and use its own directory for storing things under, whereas if a
config file is found, it assumes it is installed and being used "system-wide".

Any of the options in F<portscout.conf> can also be set on the fly on the
command line. For example:

    $ portscout --precious_data --num_children=8

=head2 Update Ports Tree (FreeBSD Only)

Ensure your ports tree is up to date.

=head2 Populate Database

We need now to populate the database with the software we want to check.

=head3 Option One: FreeBSD

If you're using Portscout to check FreeBSD ports, run:

    $ portscout build

This takes around 70 minutes for me. Basically, Portscout is extracting all
the information it needs from the ports tree. Ports (by virtue of make) is
slow; the database we're building is much faster. After this initial build, we
will do incremental 'builds', only updating what has changed.

=head3 Option Two: Other Software Repositories

If you would like to check another software repository/source, Portscout
has several options.

Firstly, NetBSD and OpenBSD's ports trees are supported by the standard
"Ports" backend. See F<portscout.conf> for details on how to configure this.
Make sure you've got the correct C<make> at hand for Portscout if you're
checking either of these from another operating system (e.g. FreeBSD).

Caveat: neither of the above have been well-tested, and support should
probably be considered experimental.

Secondly, you can use the "XML" backend for a finite list of software
that you want to manage by hand. See L<Portscout::DataSrc::XML|Portscout::DataSrc::XML>
for more information.


=head1 REGULAR OPERATION

=head2 Update Ports Tree (FreeBSD Only)

Ensure your ports tree is up to date.

=head2 Incremental Database Update

If your ports tree / data source was updated since your last build/rebuild,
ensure Portscout knows about the changes:

    $ portscout rebuild

=head2 Run Version Checks

    $ portscout check

This will instruct Portscout to search for new distfiles for each port in the
database. It will take several hours for a complete ports tree scan.

=head2 View Results

Now you've got some results, you can view them.

=head3 Option One: HTML Reports

    $ portscout generate

This will put HTML pages inside C<html_data_dir> - existing pages will be
deleted.

=head3 Option Two: E-Mail Reports

    $ portscout mail

This will send out an e-mail message to the maintainers of ports with updates.
The e-mail messages are opt-in; you will need to add addresses to the database
before any e-mails are sent out.

=head3 Option Three: Console Summary

    $ portscout showupdates

This will output a summary of software with outstanding updates. It is
recommended if you're checking a limited set of software/ports.


=head1 ADDING E-MAIL ADDRESSES

If you want to send e-mail reports to maintainers of updated of software, the
e-mail addresses need to be registered with Portscout. This is a safeguard to
ensure no one gets e-mails they don't want.

Use the following to manage these e-mail "subscriptions":

    $ portscout add-mail dave@example.net

    $ portscout remove-mail john@localhost

    $ portscout show-mail


=head1 UPGRADING

When upgrading, check the F<sql> directory for any relevant database schema
upgrade scripts. If there were multiple schema updates between the previous
version of Portscout and the version to which you have upgraded, be sure to
run each script in sequence to arrive at the latest database version.


=head1 CHECKING ALGORITHM

For anyone interested in how Portscout operates, here is a high-level summary
of the checking algorithm in use:

 Test 1:
   1) Order master sites using previous reliability data.
   2) Attempt to get an FTP listing or web server index from each site.
   3) Extract version from files found; compare to current version.
   4) Skip other tests if new or current version is found.

 Test 2:
   1) Increment each part of the port's version string and attempt to
      download file, e.g. for 1.4.2, try 2.0.0, 1.5.0 and 1.4.3

The last test is not yet included in Portscout, but I may add it at some
point, depending on the results of testing:

 Test 3:
   1) Locate port's WWW page and spider site in an attempt to find a
      page that looks like a "download area". Scan page for possible
      links to new files.


=head1 BUGS AND LIMITATIONS

=over

=item

Portscout tries to make a reasonable guess when it encounters version
strings in a different format to the original distname (e.g. 3.2,
3.6-pre7), but this is difficult and error-prone since vendor version
schemes vary wildly.

The only real problem at the moment is version strings which seem to
to count backwards (e.g. 2.11 -> 2.2).

=item

There's some difficulty in deciding what to do with trailing zeros
in version guesses. Currently, they are left intact, but this is
not always going to be the right course of action. In other words,
from 4.3.9, will the next major version be 4.4.0 or 4.4?

=item

The restrict_* variables don't affect generate/mail.

=item

Portscout doesn't handle ports with multiple distfiles very well.

=item

At least one port (archivers/zip, as of 2010-04-28) doesn't provide
a version string in the vendor's format. portscout doesn't know what
to do in this case, although the version could theoretically be
ascertained from the distfile name.

=back


=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2005-2011, Shaun Amott E<lt>shaun@inerd.comE<gt>.
All rights reserved.

=cut
